Updates for the `preview-3` release (#359)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/whats-new/preview-3.md

1. If on macOS or Linux, download and install the [.NET 8.0.100 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0)
1. From a terminal, run the following commands to update the .NET Aspire workload:

    ```dotnetcli
    dotnet workload update
    dotnet workload install aspire
    ```

    *Note that if you had previous preview versions of the .NET Aspire workload already installed, you may see messages informing you that the workload is already installed. These can be safely ignored.*

1. Refer to the docs for [detailed instructions on installing .NET Aspire](../fundamentals/setup-tooling.md)

After updating you can run `dotnet workload list` to see the updated version (note: your version of Visual Studio may differ):

```text
Installed Workload Id    Manifest Version                   Installation Source
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> aspire                   8.0.0-preview.3.XXXX.YY/8.0.100    SDK 8.0.100, VS 17.10.XXXX.YY

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aspire                   8.0.0-preview.3.24105.21/8.0.100    SDK 8.0.100, VS 17.10.XXXX.YY
```

```

### Update existing apps

> For existing .NET Aspire apps, after performing the above steps to get the latest workload, you'll want to change your package references for any Aspire components. Update **all Aspire package references (hosting and components)** to `8.0.0-preview.3.XXXXX.YY`, for example the hosting would change to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For existing .NET Aspire apps, after performing the above steps to get the latest workload, you'll want to change your package references for any Aspire components. Update **all Aspire package references (hosting and components)** to `8.0.0-preview.3.24105.21`, for example the hosting would change to:
```

```xml

> <PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting" Version="8.0.0-preview.3.XXXX.YY" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<PackageReference Include="Aspire.Hosting" Version="8.0.0-preview.3.24105.21" />
```

### StackExchange.Redis now has logging

We've updated the Aspire component to use the new feature in StackExchange.Redis which supports <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.ILogger>. Redis logs will now be shown in both the console and structured logs in the dashboard.

## AppModel Changes

### `WithServiceBinding` has changed to `WithEndpoint`

The `WithServiceBinding` API was a little unclear as to what it actually did. The API has been deprecated and replaced with `WithEndpoint`. Additional variants for `WithHttpEndpoint` and `WithHttpsEndpoint` that are parameterized for those connection types have been added.

```csharp
// This will launch the Grafana container image and bind it to a random 
// port (visible in the Dashboard). 
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var container = builder.AddContainer("grafana", "grafana/grafana")
                       .WithHttpEndpoint(3000);

builder.Build().Run();
```

### `WithEntrypoint` is now supported for containers

Using `WithEntrypoint` enables the entrypoint to be specified for container based resources.

### RedisCommander resource extension

> [Redis commander](https://github.com/joeferner/redis-commander) is a web management tool for viewing the contents of the Redis Cache. With this change you can use the `WithRedisCommander` extension to both IResourceBuilder<RedisResource> and IResourceBuilder<RedisContainerResource> which results in a container resource being added to the model (once) and a lifecycle hook which configures it for Redis Commander.

Author: ```suggestion
[Redis commander](https://github.com/joeferner/redis-commander) is a web management tool for viewing the contents of the Redis Cache. With this change you can use the `WithRedisCommander` extension to both `IResourceBuilder<RedisResource>` and `IResourceBuilder<RedisContainerResource>` which results in a container resource being added to the model (once) and a lifecycle hook which configures it for Redis Commander.
```

---

# .NET Aspire preview 3

This article covers the 3rd preview of .NET Aspire. While the goal is to have monthly releases, January was skipped due to the holidays. .NET Aspire **preview 3** is now available!

## Get .NET Aspire preview 3

The complete set of [.NET Aspire setup and tooling](../fundamentals/setup-tooling.md) instructions has been updated to reflect preview 3. The following are the key steps to get started with preview 3:

1. If on Windows and using Visual Studio to work with .NET Aspire, install/update to the latest [Visual Studio 2022 Preview](https://aka.ms/vspreview) release (17.10.0 Preview 1.0 at the time of writing).

    - Ensure that the **.NET Aspire SDK (Preview)** component is selected under the **Individual components** tab of the Visual Studio installer:

    ![Visual Studio installer with .NET Aspire SDK (Preview) component selected](media/preview-3/vs-aspire-sdk-component.png)

1. If on Windows and you have Visual Studio 2022 17.8.x installed but intend to only use .NET Aspire via the .NET CLI (`dotnet`), download and install the [.NET 8.0.100 SDK using the standalone installer](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0).

> 1. If on macOS or Linux, download and install the [.NET 8.0.100 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0).

Reviewer 2: Maybe not important for a looser what's new page, but 1-3 might read better as a set of tabs for Visual Studio, CLI, and macOS/Linux with the workload instructions below it.

Author: I thought about that and had it that way originally. It felt a bit redundant with the changes to setup and tooling, which we link to - that have been updated. This was adapted from the original draft blog post, and I went with simplicity, and it felt like tabs was overkill.

This refactoring enables the dashboard to be more easily used for real-time runtime diagnostics after deployment, as hosts can implement the same gRPC contract/endpoint for project and dependency status.

Refactoring shouldn't require any changes to .NET Aspire projects as there have been no related API changes for the projects themselves. Using the dashboard is unchanged in your development environment.

### Localization and accessibility

Many small changes across the dashboard have been made to support localization and accessibility. These changes include improving color contrast, adding accessibility attributes, and moving UI text into resource files.

An example of an improvement is how the dashboard indicates trace length. Previously there was a subtle color gradient on each row that didn't meet accessibility requirements. In preview 3 this was replaced with a radial progress icon:

:::image type="content" source="media/preview-3/trace-duration.png" lightbox="media/preview-3/trace-duration.png" alt-text="Trace details page with new radial icon used to quickly differentiate trace lengths.":::

### New resource details view

> The resources page grid was bursting at the seams with information. In preview 3 there's now a resource details view. The grid continues to display important information, and additional details, including all of a resources properties, are available in the details view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resources page grid was previously overloaded with information. Preview 3 now includes a resource details view for improved readability. The grid continues to display important information, while the details view shows additional data, including all of the resource's properties.
```

Just a personal opinion but this bit sounded a little odd to me - an alternate version here.

:::image type="content" source="media/preview-3/resource-details-view.png" lightbox="media/preview-3/resource-details-view.png" alt-text="Resource details view.":::

### Telemetry improvements

The dashboard telemetry pages show off a number of improvements:

- **Metrics filter UI**: The metrics filter UI has been redesigned. It's now much faster to update filters when viewing a metrics chart.
- **Histogram metrics count**: There is a new option to view the count of items recorded to a histogram metric.
- **Span events**: OpenTelemetry spans support events. For example, when was the first data received during a database call. Events are available in span details view.

## Component updates

> [.NET Aspire components](../fundamentals/components-overview.md) are a curated suite of NuGet packages specifically selected to facilitate the integration of cloud-native applications with prominent services and platforms. Each component furnishes essential cloud-native functionalities through either automatic provisioning or standardized configuration patterns. .NET Aspire components can be used without an orchestrator project, but they're designed to work best with the .NET Aspire app host.

Reviewer 2: Love this concise but informative summary of components.

### Azure AI OpenAI component

This component enables integration of the Azure AI OpenAI or OpenAI services from a .NET Aspire project. Assuming you already have an OpenAI service provisioned, you can use OpenAI from your projects.

- [Aspire.Azure.AI.OpenAI](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Azure.AI.OpenAI) NuGet 📦 package.

```csharp
using Azure.AI.OpenAI;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

// Add service defaults and components.
builder.AddServiceDefaults();
builder.AddAzureOpenAI("OpenAI");

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapGet("/chat", static async (string request, OpenAIClient client) =>
{
    var options = new ChatCompletionsOptions(
        "gpt-35-turbo", [new ChatRequestUserMessage(request)]);

    var response = await client.GetChatCompletionsAsync(options);

    return response.Value.Choices.FirstOrDefault()?.Message.Content
        ?? "no response...";
});

app.MapDefaultEndpoints();

app.Run();
```

> For more information, see [GitHub: .NET Aspire.Azure.AI.OpenAI](https://github.com/dotnet/aspire/tree/main/src/Components/Aspire.Azure.AI.OpenAI).

Reviewer 2: Does OpenAI need anything for the Hosting project?

Author: Yeah, see https://github.com/dotnet/aspire/blob/main/src/Aspire.Hosting.Azure/AzureOpenAIResource.cs

var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var container = builder.AddContainer("grafana", "grafana/grafana")
                       .WithHttpEndpoint(3000);

builder.Build().Run();
```

### `WithEntrypoint` is now supported for containers

Using `WithEntrypoint` enables the entrypoint to be specified for container based resources.

### RedisCommander resource extension

[Redis commander](https://github.com/joeferner/redis-commander) is a web management tool for viewing the contents of the Redis Cache. With this change you can use the `WithRedisCommander` extension to both `IResourceBuilder<RedisResource>` and `IResourceBuilder<RedisContainerResource>` which results in a container resource being added to the model (once) and a lifecycle hook which configures it for Redis Commander.

Once added, when run a pre-configured Redis Commander instance is spun up to interactively browse what is in the Redis Cache. It can be accessed via the Aspire Dashboard. For example:

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.AddRedis("myredis1").WithRedisCommander();

builder.AddRedis("myredis2").WithRedisCommander();

> ```

Reviewer 2: This is really coool.

```csharp
builder.AddProject<Projects.DaprServiceA>("servicea")
       .WithDaprSidecar(
            static sidecarBuilder =>
            {
                sidecarBuilder.WithOptions(new DaprSidecarOptions
                    {
                        // ...
                    })
                    .WithEnvironment("DAPR_TEST_VAR", "Dapr Test Value");
            });
```

### Add support for Dapr `--runtime-path` option

This change enables running Aspire applications with an arbitrary version of the Dapr runtime, such as when you want to test against a locally-built version of Dapr.

```csharp
builder.AddProject<Projects.DaprServiceB>("serviceb")
       .WithDaprSidecar(new DaprSidecarOptions
        {
            AppId = "serviceb",
            RuntimePath = "/some/other/runtime/folder"
        });
```

## Add support for Orleans in .NET Aspire

> Starting with preview 3, support for [Orleans](/dotnet/orleans/overview) was added, allowing you to configure a cluster in your app host, specifying the resources the cluster uses. For example, you can specify that an Azure Table will be used for cluster membership, an Azure Redis resource will be used for the grain directory, and an Azure Blob Storage resource will be used to store grain state. The integration currently support Redis and Azure Table & Blob storage resources. Support for other resources will be added later.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Preview 3 adds support for [Orleans](/dotnet/orleans/overview) v8.1.0-preview1 or later, allowing you to configure a cluster in your app host, specifying the resources the cluster uses. For example, you can specify that an Azure Table will be used for cluster membership, an Azure Redis resource will be used for the grain directory, and an Azure Blob Storage resource will be used to store grain state. The integration currently support Redis and Azure Table & Blob storage resources. Support for other resources will be added later.
```
